JUDY WOODRUFF: The future
of coal is very much at the
center of debate right now when
it comes to the politics
and business of energy.
Whatever you may think about
those questions, the U.S.
still uses a lot of coal.
About 30 percent of our
energy, of our electricity
is generated by it.
For some, the Holy Grail is
new technology that captures
some of coal's worst problems
with greenhouse gases.
Miles O'Brien reports
on the largest facility
trying to do so.
It's part of our weekly
series on the Leading Edge
of science and technology.
MILES O'BRIEN: At the
W.A. Parish power plant
southwest of Houston,
they are piling up coal,
getting ready for another
long, hot, aggressively
air-conditioned summer.
One of the largest fossil fuel
power plants in the country,
Parish can generate about
one-fifth of the city's
electricity using coal-
and gas-fired turbines.
And it is leading the
nation down a promising,
yet problematic path.
Here, they are trying
to make clean coal more
than a political slogan.
Mauricio Gutierrez is CEO
of NRG, owner of the plant.
MAURICIO GUTIERREZ, President
and CEO, NRG: We built the
world's largest carbon capture
system on an existing
coal-fired power plant.
It is the first commercial
scale facility of this
kind in the United States.
MILES O'BRIEN: They are
capturing and storing
carbon dioxide, the
greenhouse gas that is
the main driver
of global warming.
This is prompting some
unexpected support from members
of the Trump administration.
Listen to Energy Secretary
Rick Perry at the ceremonial
opening in April.
RICK PERRY, U.S. Secretary of
Energy: I think the solutions
to many of the challenges that
we have in the world today
are displayed behind me.
MILES O'BRIEN: The same Rick
Perry who wrote a book calling
climate scientists members
of a secular carbon cult who
manipulate data and climate
science a contrived, phony mess,
but not here.
RICK PERRY: It shows we don't
have to pit the environment
on one side weighing and the
economy on the other side.
We can and we will be
good stewards of both.
MILES O'BRIEN: The steward of
this project for NRG is David
Greeson, the vice president
of development.
DAVID GREESON, Vice President
of Development, NRG: We're
interested in doing more carbon
capture as a part of our overall
sustainable energy future
plan, and so we're going to
see how this one works.
MILES O'BRIEN: They call the
billion-dollar carbon capture
and storage system Petra Nova.
NRG built it in partnership
with the Japanese oil company
JX Nippon using a $190 million
grant from the Department
of Energy doled out during
the Obama administration.
DAVID GREESON: So we're
capturing about 200
tons of CO2 per hour.
On an annual basis, that's
about 1.6 million tons per year.
That's the equivalent of 350,000
cars being taken off the road.
MILES O'BRIEN: While it may
be the world's largest carbon
capture facility, it is still
only removing about 10 percent
of the CO2 created by the
four coal-fired generators
here.
The only obstacle to
capturing more is money.
DAVID GREESON: We're just now
reaching the point where this
technology is mature enough
to be considered for rollout
to the broad coal-fired fleet
in the United States and
around the world.
MILES O'BRIEN:
Here's how it works.
Flue gas, with carbon dioxide
in it, flows through a duct to
the carbon capture facility.
One vessel contains
amine, an ammonia-based
chemical in liquid form.
It naturally binds
with carbon dioxide.
With the carbon now in solution,
the liquid goes to another
vessel, where it is heated
up.
As that happens, the
process is reversed and
the CO2 pops out as a gas.
It is captured, and, after
it is compressed, ready
for underground storage.
MICHAEL WEBBERÑMD-BOÑ,
University of Texas at Austin:
I think Petra Nova is a shining
example of what technology
offers, and so, as an engineer,
I'm very enthusiastic about
it.
I think it's very exciting.
MILES O'BRIEN: Michael Webber
is deputy director of the Energy
Institute at the University
of Texas at Austin.
He says the energy
sector is watching this
project very closely.
MICHAEL WEBBER: We're getting a
lot of scrutiny because people
want to know if carbon capture
and sequestration will work.
And there are examples around
the nation, around the world
where it hasn't really quite
come together the
way people want.
It's really expensive and hard
to do, so you wouldn't do it
unless you had to, or it's
in your economic favor to do so.
MILES O'BRIEN: And a
coincidence of geography
has made that possible here.
The CO2 from the Petra Nova
facility is sent 80 miles to
the southwest, to the West Ranch
oil field.
Here, the gas is as good as
gold, black gold, Texas tea.
JILL FISK, Senior Vice
President, Hilcorp: That
was the hope, if you
marry up a partnership
between a CO2 emitter where
they can capture the CO2 and
reduce their CO2 emissions, but
then that CO2 can be used
to increase oil production.
That's really a win-win.
MILES O'BRIEN: Jill Fisk is
a senior vice president for
Hilcorp, the current operator
of this oil field, which
first opened in the 1930s.
At its peak in the
'70s, it produced 50,000
barrels of oil a day.
Today, it's down to less
than 300 barrels a day.
Normally, it would be time
to cap the wells here.
But, instead, they're drilling
new ones, getting ready to pump
a lot more oil by injecting
carbon dioxide deep underground.
Liquid CO2 has been used to
liberate the most stubborn
oil for about 40 years.
JILL FISK: Essentially, what's
happening is the oil is stuck
to rock, if you can imagine
that.
The CO2 is injected,
it dissolves into that
oil that's stuck to the
rock, loosens up the
oil, lightens it up, which --
so it can then flow toward a
producer and produce additional
oil.
At West Ranch, we're expecting
to recover an additional 60
million barrels of oil that
would otherwise be left in the
ground and be unrecoverable
without a project of this
type.
MILES O'BRIEN: Right now,
with oil prices so low, Petra
Nova is breaking even, but,
over the next decade, they
expect to make a tidy profit
capturing and burying carbon
dioxide.
But doesn't this just transfer
greenhouse gas emissions
from a power plant smokestack
to automobile tailpipes?
JILL FISK: So, I think that
demand for oil is either going
to be met by foreign oil that
the United States has
to purchase or by our
own production that
we're able to supply.
So this project is breathing
new life into a field in the
U.S. to help supply that demand
for oil.
MILES O'BRIEN: But how
can we be certain buried
CO2 will stay underground?
Scientists from the University
of Texas are running tests at
22 monitoring wells at West
Ranch, getting baseline data
so they will know later if
the injected CO2 triggers some
unintended consequences, like
earthquakes or the release
of deep dwelling salt water,
minerals, or chemicals.
At this test site in Austin,
they are finding new ways
to monitor the buried CO2.
SUE HOVORKA, University of Texas
at Austin: You ready to start?
MILES O'BRIEN: They pump
the gas into groundwater
to simulate leaks.
They use a sensor
that measures light.
It is coated with a polymer that
thins when it reacts with CO2.
If there's any trouble,
the sensor detects more
light, and an alarm is
transmitted automatically.
Geologist Sue Hovorka
leads this effort.
SUE HOVORKA: We need to get
good enough to provide value
to the atmosphere, and we need
to avoid unacceptable
consequences.
MILES O'BRIEN: Hovorka analyzes
deep rock core samples stored
in a cavernous warehouse
at the Bureau of Economic
Geology in Austin.
She says there are ample places
to bury carbon dioxide produced
by all types of fossil fuel
power plants, not
just coal burners.
That would be a
monumental step toward
addressing climate change.
SUE HOVORKA: If consumers want
to use coal and want to reduce
the carbon from that, the
system to do that
is ready to go.
They have to pay for it.
It's not outrageous.
It's totally possible,
but it's not free.
MILES O'BRIEN: Up until now,
clean coal has been nothing
more than a marketing myth.
It could become a reality at
no small cost, but at a small
fraction of the toll if the
industry does nothing
to stop global warming.
In Richmond, Texas, I'm Miles
O'Brien for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And as Miles
just said, costs are just one
of the questions about whether
this model could be
replicated more widely.
And Miles joins me
now from Boston.
So, Miles, tell us more
about why -- and so this is
the first plant of its kind.
What are the challenges
in trying to replicate
this somewhere else and
getting the same results?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well,
Judy, the secret sauce
of this one, according
to the innovators behind
it, is, they reduced the cost
of creating the carbon capture.
When I say cost,
the cost in power.
Normally, what the assumption
is, that it reduces the output
of any given power plant
by as much as 30 percent
in order to run the
carbon capture system.
What they did in this case was
they decided not to use the
actual turbines which light
the lights that I'm using
right now, but rather a
separate co-generation
plant air, a smaller
power plant on site that can
be run much more efficiently.
And they say that they -- it's
costing them about 15 percent
of the power-generating capacity
of that plant.
So that's a big hurdle
that they have gotten over.
Now, 15 percent is still a
big number, and unless you
have some commodity or the CO2
has some value, the business
model doesn't add up just yet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you were
telling us, Miles, there are
also some physical challenges as
well.
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, being 80
miles near an old oil field that
could use that CO2 to capture
and recover a lot of
stubborn oil from the
ground makes it all work.
The question is, could a
fossil fuel plant of any kind
that's a long way away from an
oil field, could it avail itself
of this kind of transaction?
And CO2 can be pumped in
pipelines for an indefinite
amount of distance, as long as
you recompress every now
and then, sort of have
a booster system in.
But, again, that's going
to be a significant cost.
It is not an insurmountable
thing technologically,
and it could be done.
We already have significant CO2
pipelines in the oil sector.
You could extend it out, if
you were determined to do this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, just
quickly, you were also saying
other practical limits.
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, yes.
It's -- the limits on this are
-- there are some concerns,
for example, about putting
CO2 in seismically active
places, for example.
You wouldn't want to put
buried CO2 underneath San
Francisco, for example.
But, having said all that, when
you consider all the places
that it can be stored, the
experts tell me, we have enough
storage capacity underneath the
continental United States to
last about 900 years
of CO2 production.
So, it's just a question of
societal priorities and whether
we want to pay a little more for
power to get the
carbon dioxide out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Miles
O'Brien, thanks very much.
MILES O'BRIEN:
You're welcome, Judy.